Grasshopper mouse (genus Onychomys), any of three species of terrestrial, nocturnal, insectivorous and carnivorous mice that are physiologically adapted to semiarid and arid habitats in the open country of western North America. The northern grasshopper mouse (Onychomys leucogaster) lives in grassland and shrub steppes from central Canada southward through the Great Plains and Great Basin to northern Mexico. The southern grasshopper mouse (O. torridus) is found from southern California, Nevada, and Utah southward to northeastern Mexico. Mearns’ grasshopper mouse (O. arenicola) ranges from the southwestern United States to central Mexico. The last two species prefer warm, very arid, scrubby desert habitats. All are stout bodied, weighing up to 49 grams (1.7 ounces) and having a body length up to 13 cm (just over 5 inches) and a much shorter tail of up to 6 cm. The coat is silky and dense; the underparts are white; and the upperparts range from grayish to reddish brown, depending upon the species.

Often living in the burrows of prairie dogs, kangaroo rats, and pocket mice, grasshopper mice also construct their own burrows for nesting and food storage. They mostly eat insects, especially grasshoppers, beetles, crickets, and scorpions, but also stalk, kill, and eat other small rodents such as kangaroo rats, white-footed mice, and voles. Seeds constitute only a small part of their diet. Because their population densities are low and because they are highly aggressive, strongly territorial, and voracious, grasshopper mice are regarded as small analogues of larger mammalian carnivores. These mice even communicate over long distances with a pure-tone howl that is audible to humans—like a miniature version of a coyote howl.

The three living Onychomys species belong to the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the “true” mouse family, Muridae, within the order Rodentia. Today’s Onychomys species are related to grasshopper mice represented by four-million to five-million-year-old fossils that extend the evolutionary history of the genus back to the Early Pliocene Epoch (5.3 million to 3.6 million years ago) in North America.
